Okay. So let's continue now with our discussion of some basic chemistry. And as I said last time, I want to, um, continue the last few slides that I sort of rushed through and that we didn't get to at the last time. And that was again, of course, we had some questions, and that's perfectly cool. All right. So questions are welcome. So let's go back again. Remember this is, uh, Lord Rutherford of Nelson and he this he looked at an experiment to try to figure out where the positive charge in a atom was located. And there were two models. You see this plus sign here. This positive charge would be evenly distributed all around the nucleus or the atom, and then electrons would sort of be buried like a raisins in a plum pudding like that. The other idea was that maybe the the nucleus, very, very tight area contained all the positive charge and all the mass. And so he fired these positively charged particles at some very thin gold foil. The idea is what would happen to these positively charged particles. And it turned out that they didn't just go through. Some of them actually were deflected at great angles and some actually bounce back at them. And this led him to conclude that most of the mass by far, because electrons don't weigh that much. And all of the positive charge was located in a very, very, very small volume of the atom. And I showed you an example as if you had a stadium. Was the atom. The nucleus would be like the size of a pea. Okay. So a very, very small. Okay. So this proves that actually there is such a thing as an atomic nucleus like that which is positively charged. All right. And that's where the protons would deliver, of course, because the protons are the positively charged particles inside the atom. And so here we have two models. One is sort of the planetary models where the electrons sort of orbit around the nucleus. This is helium has two protons and two neutrons. And this is more accurate this sort of a electron cloud. And what that means is it's just a probability cloud in other words. And I'll get into more detail of this in a little bit. Electrons occupy a certain place in the atom, and this is a probability distribution of where they are most likely to be found 90% of the time. Okay, now that doesn't mean that can't be found other places, but the chances of them are being found in other places are very, very low. In other words, in this probability distribution, one of your electrons could be on the moon, but the probability is very, very low. Okay. So this is where they would hang out most of the time. Okay. So how do elements differ. Have we talked about elements. Each element has a unique number of protons called the atomic number. So change the. This is key. Change the number of protons. You change the element. Remember the an element. An atom is the smallest bit of an element you can have and still have that element. And an element is something that can't be changed to something else by chemical means. Okay, so if you change the number of protons, you get a different element. Now an atoms mass number is the number of number of protons plus neutrons. So we add the number of protons and neutrons. You change the mass number. And I'm going to turn this down just a little bit. Okay. And so here's an example of carbon. Carbon's atomic number is six. Its mass number is 12. That means it has six neutrons six protons six neutrons mass number of 12. Here's the helium. I showed you the helium atom a little bit earlier. It has two protons. That's what makes it helium. One proton is hydrogen. Three protons. Lithium. Two protons. Helium. And it has two neutrons. And of course, in the neutral atom, the number of protons is going to equal the number of electrons. As it says here in a neutral atom. This is also the same number of electrons. All right. So this is Dmitri Mendeleev. And he is responsible for basically for building up the periodic table. He said let me line up the elements in increasing mass number. And if you did that, you did it in certain ways. He started to realize that here are the different masses that have been calculated. Their chemical properties started to repeat. And so lithium and calcium etc. and potassium. Here's calcium over here. They had very similar chemical properties. So this is sort of a periodicity periodic table of the chemical properties of these elements. And if you looked at this you see that virtually all of them are whole numbers. But he ran into an issue with chlorine because chlorine had a mass number of 35.5. And this didn't make any sense to him. I mean, everything else is a whole number. Why does this have a 35.5? Well, this leads us to a discussion of isotopes. Isotopes are alternate atomic mass forms of an element. Remember, all forms of an element. All the atoms have the same number of protons. You change the proton, you change the element. But they don't all have the same number of neutrons. And that changes their mass. Because the mass of the proton is roughly the same as the mass of the neutron. So different isotopes of an element have the same number of protons, and of course same number of electrons in a neutral atom. But have different number of neutrons. Now isotopes can be stable or radioactive. Sometimes you hear of isotope and you think it must be radioactive. That's not true. There are stable isotopes that are not radioactive, and there are radioactive isotopes that do emit radiation. So. If we line up these elements now in the periodic table. And we do it in a way that does not include all the isotopes. You see, you have pretty even numbers. Okay. So one proton mass number of one two protons plus two neutrons. Mass number of four. You have carbon six protons six neutrons mass number of 12. However let's take a closer look at this now. In the real world there are three forms of the element hydrogen of the atom of hydrogen. This. Hydrogen one. Times number of one mass. Number of one. Hydrogen two, which is called deuterium. Atomic number of one mass. Number of two. Atomic. Here's tritium. Probably heard of that. Atomic number of one Mass. Number of three. Why? Because hydrogen one has no neutrons. Deuterium has one neutron, so one plus one is two. Tritium has two neutrons one, two, three. So all have the same number of protons. They differ in the number of neutrons. And adding that extra neutron to tritium causes it the nucleus to be unstable. And it becomes radioactive. As you can see. Now if we look at carbon in the real world, here's the carbon 12. We talked about the mass number of 12. Six protons six neutrons. Here's carbon 13 mass number of 13 six protons seven neutrons. Carbon 14. N still has to have six protons. Atomic number and mass. Number of 14. Okay, so there are eight neutrons. Now check this out. Naturally occurring carbon which you would get let's say if you, you know, burned a piece of wood and you had carbon left almost 99% is carbon 12 about 1% naturally occurring carbon is carbon 13. And a very small amount trace amount is carbon 14. And so the mass number of naturally occurring carbon. And by the way carbon 14 is radioactive as you know. And that's the unstable atomic mass of naturally occurring carbon is 12.011. It's not a whole number because it's a mixture of these three isotopes. Now let's get back to chlorine. Turns out and Mendeleev didn't know this about. Don't memorize these numbers. Percentages, by the way. 76% is carbon. Is chlorine 35? Chlorine 37 has two more neutrons. And that's 24% of naturally occurring chlorine. And you take these in that proper ratio. Of course they both have 17 protons. Otherwise it wouldn't be chlorine. Mix them in the right combination. And you come up with a mass number of 35.5. And that's why I had a mass number of 35.5 that had two different major isotopes, not in equal percentages and not having the same mass number. So that introduces atomic isotopes to us. Any questions or comments? Yeah. Nice and loud. All right. If the neutron is neutral, then, uh, and the isotope, you know, changes the amount of neutrons, then why does that isotope have a positive or negative charge, or is it or does it just stay neutral? Since all the isotopes have the same number of protons. They will all have the same number of electrons. And so they will be neutral. Okay. Good. Yeah. Um, what are the units of the atomic mass? There's atomic mass. Have unit atomic mass units. It's very simple. The units of atomic mass are the atomic mass units. Okay. So here we have the periodic table. Now, if you look closely at this, I only put it up to show. If you look at all these numbers of the mass numbers. Notice they are all not whole numbers. Why? Because these numbers also include all the isotopes of those elements. So this is more accurate than the earlier periodic table I showed you. It reflects the fact that there are multiple isotopes for virtually all elements. Okay. And this is just a quick thing I wanted to show you. Don't memorize this. Just a flash. This just shows you as elements become radioactive. And these are all radioactive, starting with uranium. They change their atomic number. Sometimes the neutron will break down, actually, to create a proton again. And anyway, this. This is what I told you before. One element can be turned to another through. Atomic radiation. Okay, but not through chemical changes. Okay. That's why in a nuclear bomb, you actually create new elements. That's why the sun creates new elements, because they're nuclear reactions. Okay, so facts about atoms and electrons. The volume in which an electron is found in an atom 90% of the time is called an orbital. This goes back to that old model of a planet which has an orbit. So this is where the electrons live 90% of the time. That's an orbital. Each orbital holds up to two electrons. This is just a fact. So a particular orbital. You can think of it as the ring. If you want. It can hold two electrons. Can't hold more. Can hold only one 1 or 2. So here's an example. Here's the planetary Model. Here's the electron cloud. So this in this is helium. Two protons, two electrons. Bingo. This is a neutral atom. Two protons. Two electrons. Two things that are positive. Two things that are negative. The atom itself is neutral. Okay. Now each orbital holds up to two electrons. The greater energy in electron has, the greater the distance from the nucleus. Think of it as more speed. This is I'm being very non physical science here. But just think that has more energy. It's further away from the nucleus. Now atoms energy levels are discrete in shells, so the further away from the nucleus, the more energy it has. But these energy levels are not like one and a half or 1 in 3 quarters. It'd be like one, two, three, etc.. Discrete levels of energy. I'll show you what I mean more about this in a second. And each of these energy levels are called shells. So a shell is an energy level inside an atom, and there are orbitals inside the shell that can be for many shells there can be more more than one orbital, more than one electron. And this can be depicted this way. You see, hydrogen has one shell with one orbital. And in this case, helium has filled that shell with two electrons. And now you see, this is depicted as a higher level of energy with its own orbitals. And now we're filling those up like this. The first shell has one orbital. The second shell has four orbitals, which gives you a maximum of eight electrons. These are energy levels. The second shell holds is a higher energy can hold a electrons. The basic chemistry going through this because this will all come back later on when we discuss and professor SciFri discusses things like photosynthesis etc.. Okay, so what is this? How do we get these energy levels? What do I mean by this? Well, the atomic nucleus is down here. Pretend. And here we have a stairway. So, as I was saying, if I'm starting to walk up these stairs, I'm actually increasing my gravitational potential energy. Right. If I were to fall off, this first stair wouldn't be so bad. But as you go up higher. Of course, now I'm creating greater gravitational potential. Energy. That fall would be more severe. But notice I'm never at a half step. I'm only a full step. This is like the energy levels in an atom. They're discrete, just like a stairway. I'm not going that far. I love you like that. All right. So the higher shelf can hold more orbital. So this is what we might do if we really draw that stairway more accurately to depict the energy levels in an atom. Each energy level holds more orbitals. In other words, holds more electrons. The atomic nucleus is down here. This is the further away we get. Okay. And there is the first shell. The second shell. The third shell. Fourth shell, etc.. Shells in different atoms holding more and more electrons all the time. Now I'm depicting the second shell here with these eight electrons as one big circle. But that ain't the way it works. Because remember, an orbital is where electron lives 90% of the time. So let's take a closer look at this. I don't want you to memorize these things. I just want you to visualize it. Okay, so here's the first shell. The first shell is spherical. It's a ball. This is what's around the hydrogen atom. The second shell has four orbitals. And guess what? One is a sphere and three are dumbbell shaped. And these dumbbells are at right angles to one another. So if I draw the second shell I'm going through this quickly because I don't want to memorize it. I just want you to get the idea. This would be the first shell inside the second shell and the first shell is small the sphere. And here are the sphere and the three dumbbell ones of the second shell, first and second shell. And we could depict the second shell as here the spherical orbital. And then one dumbbell. Another dumbbell. Another dumbbell. This is where these electrons are buzzing around 90% of the time. Like that. And as we get more and more and you can find this online, if get more and more shells with more and more orbitals, this distribution of these dumbbells and everything become wild after a while, fitting them all into the atom. You can take a look at it if you want, but just to give you the spatial idea of where these electrons are hanging out like that. So that's what we mean when we draw something like this. You have to just keep in mind that it's not really a circle like that. By the way, this depiction here is missing some electrons, I noticed. It should be two here. No big deal, but whatever. Okay, now now we're going to get a little bit into chemistry for these atoms and basically the atoms that we're dealing with in this class having to do with biological materials. The outermost shells become stable with eight electrons, even though that shell might hold more than eight electrons or just two for the first shell. Because the first shell only has one orbital, it can only hold two electrons. But here we have the second shell. Two. Four. Six eight. This is a particularly stable configuration. And in the third shell, which actually can hold 18 electrons. Still 2468. This is a particularly stable configuration of these electrons. Now as I'm going to tell you in a minute the chemical properties of the atoms we're going to talk about and the elements we're going to talk about basically depend on the number of electrons on the outermost shell. The number of electrons on the outermost shell. And it just so happens that when For the first shell, two electrons and all the next shells eight electrons. That configuration is very, very chemically stable. This is called the octet rule. You may remember it. Eight electrons in the outermost shell creates a very chemically stable element. And that's why neon and argon, these are gases and they're called noble gases. May heard the term they're noble because they don't like to engage in chemical compounds. Like to stay by themselves. Okay. Now. The third shell can hold 18 electrons. Not just eight. It has nine orbitals. Remember first one. First shell had one orbital. Second one had four. Third one has nine, so nine times two. Because the maximum of two electrons per orbital you can hold 18, but still the outermost shell if it has eight, that's very chemically stable. You can hold more. Alright. So if we look at the distribution of electrons using these circular models for the shells, we can see that here's hydrogen atomic number one one proton one electron. But this orbital can hold two electrons. So you've got a space here. Put another proton in. You'll add another electron. You have helium. Here's carbon atomic number six six protons. And this serves six neutrons probably. And you have four okay. 1234. And the outermost shell electrons two in the innermost shell. So. 12345. Six. Six electrons, six protons. And look, now you have space for four more electrons. But of course you don't have enough protons to suck them in, so that remains empty. Add another proton nitrogen. Now you only have three empty spaces for electrons. Add another proton. Now you have oxygen. Now you have only two. If you fill up the electrons in the atom by adding more protons. Now if you just think back for a second, this configuration are going to be part of that circle. And those dumbbells I showed you. That's how they are occupying the space in the atom. But it's convenient, especially in the class like this, to show them as just simply circle. Okay. But we're filling up. That shell. By adding more protons. That energy level. Okay. Any questions on any of that? Okay. Let's do some chemistry basics. Three facts about chemistry and biological systems. Number one, the outermost shells are considered filled with eight electrons except for hydrogen atom which is filled with two because it has only one orbital. Chemical properties of atoms are determined by the number of electrons in the outermost shell, even though that shell could have more. Chemical properties are added more due to the desire, quote unquote, to gain outermost shells with eight electrons. Except for hydrogen was once two. All right. So what is a chemical compound? A chemical compound consists of two or more elements in a fixed ratio. Fixed ratio, not a mixture. You know, uh, carbon as an element is a black powder, right? Sulfur as an element. Elemental sulfur is a yellow powder. If I mix them in a beaker or something, that's not a compound, because I could always add more carbon, or I could always add more sulfur and shake it up and there'd be a mix. But what's the chemical formula for water? 1 or 2. Yeah, H2O. Right. So what is wrong with H2O? Ratio of 2 to 1 H2O two. What's H2O two? I know you can put it on a wound. Hydrogen peroxide. It's not water anymore. It's hydrogen peroxide. Okay. So it's always a fixed ratio. This has to do with the way they're bonded together. And these fixed ratio formed through chemical bonds. And there are different types of chemical bonds. And I want to walk them through you today. And walk you through them. One or the other. All right. So Now the bigger the nucleus is, the more protons it has, i.e. the stronger it can pull on electrons. In general, there is a variation of that, but I don't need to go into it now. So a classic example for this one type of bond is what we call an ionic bond. Because here we have sodium has 11 protons. That means its outermost shell has only got one electron. Here's chlorine. It's got 17 protons. Its outermost shell has one two, three, four, five, six, seven. Now, if we said that chlorine would really like to have eight electrons. You know what? Sodium would like to have eight electrons to get rid of this guy. This is such a strong nucleus. It actually pulls this electron away from sodium, fills it. It fills its shell with eight here. Leaves this eight here. These guys are happy. But when that happens, this outermost shell only has one, and this has seven. Now this has eight. This has eight. But guess what? This has one fewer electrons than it has protons has an extra charge of plus one. That electron that was neutralizing it so to speak. That's gone. This one has picked up a negative charge. This is negatively charged. Well this makes this sodium atom electrically electrochemical attracted to the chlorine atom. And they bond. And this is called an ion because it has a charge. This is called an ion. Negative ion. They associate with each other. They bond to each other and they make salt. Table salt. And the ratio is 1 to 1. Just another loss of an electron. Gain of an electron. Positive charge of plus one negative charge and minus one. These will bond to each other. And now they both are happy with eight electrons in the outermost shell. Okay, now you probably know that salt forms a crystal like this, where the atoms are packed in a discrete way, not just randomly. Melting sodium chloride. Why am I showing you this? If you take salt. No water or anything, you take salt and you put it on some aluminum foil or something. And you put it in your oven and you crank back to 450 degrees, let's say. What happens to the salt? Nothing gets hot. How about a thousand degrees? No, nothing. These ionic bonds can be very, very strong. So in order to melt sodium chloride, you need an acetylene torch like this. This salt melts at 1400 degrees, and it will only boil at 2575 degrees. Now, water, as you know, will boil. Use a centigrade scale 100 degrees. Okay, so this is a very, very stable bond. These guys are attracted to each other very, very strongly. And yet you put them in put them in water. And the salt is out. I'll tell you more about that next glance. Okay. So that's a an ionic bond where you actually surrender one electron or more. Okay. What about a different type of bond? Well, this forms when two atoms share one or more pairs of outer shell electrons. Not all chemical bonds are formed by elements that have such different pulling power of their nuclei. To rip electrons one from the other. That's just is not the case. But they still want to form bonds that will, quote unquote, fill their outermost shells. And that's what these covalent bonds are like. They share electrons and they always share pairs. Keep that in mind. This is a big deal. They always share a pair of electrons, not just one. Bonds can be single one pairs of electrons shared double. Two pairs of electrons shared or triple. Three pairs of electrons shared. Let me give you some examples. So here's water H2O. Oxygen. Remember it has six. It wants to have eight. It's going to share a pair. With this hydrogen it's going to share. That way hydrogen is going to share its single electron share. Its single electron oxygen is going to share one of its ones in the outermost shell. Together you have these. Everybody is basically sharing electrons so that at least some of the time they have a full outermost shell. Remember hydrogen is filled with two. This is a single covalent bond. One pair shared. One pair shared in ammonia, nitrogen and three hydrogens. You see? Remember nitrogen had a little bit more room for sharing. Here's carbon. Remember it had four empty spaces for electrons. So it can share four hydrogens. This one each sharing one. Carbon sharing one. Everybody pretends they have full outermost shells. Hydrogen 2222. Carbon 12345678. These are covalent bonds filling the outermost shells. By sharing. One. There you go. Now a double bond is two shared electron patterns. This is carbon dioxide. Two. Here two. Here they're sharing too. To hear, to hear. You still can count. Eight. 1234. Five. Six. Seven. Eight. Etcetera. Three. Four. Five. Six. Seven. Eight. 125. Seven. Eight. Everybody is happy. Molecular nitrogen. Nitrogen gas shares three pairs of electrons. One, two. Three. To fill those outermost shells by sharing with eight electrons. Two. Four. Six. Eight. Two. Four. Six. Eight. Don't count the ones inside. That's the innermost shell. Those aren't involved in this chemical bond. Just the outermost shell. Electrons are involved in the in the chemical bond. Now, I want to show you something. Can you see me? Okay. All right. So here's an atom. Here's an atom. Let's make a single covalent bond. Share an electron pair. See? I can spin this around. Cool. This has free rotation. This is important. A single single covalent bond. The atoms can rotate like this. Let's make a double covalent bond. Doesn't rotate. No free rotation around a double bond. And if I add another one. Triple bond. No free rotation around a triple bond that's stuck in this particular configuration. Now with the flag up. This actually has very major implications for a whole bunch of things. Remember double bonds do not have free rotation. And you know what the difference between a trans fat and a fat that's not a trans fat. It has to do with where that. I'll show you this later on. We talk about fats, but I'll come back to it. It's where that double bond is. There's a double bond there, and it's locking the position of the atoms surrounding it, creating a different configuration. One of which is biological. And the trans fat is not biological. And that's why they've been banned from US foods now in processed food. I'll come back to that another time, because again, we want to discuss things that seem to be relevant to your life and health. All right. Now here how you can draw these molecules. These are these electron configuration drawings here. These structural formulas stuff ball and stix space filling which gives you the volume of the atom, etc., etc.. All they're all fine. Okay. So you might see one or the other. And here's the same thing. Molecular formula. Structural formula bowling state space filling etc.. All right. Like that. And these are double bonds. There'd be free rotation here around these hydrogens spinning like this. But these oxygens would be locked together like that. They couldn't they couldn't rotate against one another. By the way. Element. Hydrogen element. Oxygen element. Nitrogen hydrogen gas H2 oxygen gas. O2 hydrogen gas N2. Okay, there's the difference. Triple bond. Double bond. Single bond. Now, any questions on anything I've said? All right. Let me touch upon the topic of electrical polarity. This gets back to the strength of the nucleus. How strong? How positive is this nucleus? How hard does it pull? Now polarity electrical polarity has to do with. Where the electrons spend their time. Electrical polarity of a bond. When a bond is not polar, the electrons are equally shared between the two atoms. So. Hydrogen. Methane. These molecules are symmetrical, and the carbon is not pulling so hard that these electrons end up spending a whole bunch more time with the carbon than the hydrogen. So the molecule is neutral, but also the bonds have no polarity. Extreme polarity is if one atom rips an electron off the other. It's so strong the nucleus. And this creates an ionic bond. So that's an extreme polarity of that bond. one atom is positive. The other one is negative. But there's something in between. A partial polarity. A classic example is water. Oxygen pulls on these electrons much harder than hydrogen can with its single proton. So these are a single covalent bond. Each of these bonds sharing two electrons. But the electrons spend a bunch more time with the hydrogen than they do. Excuse me? With the oxygen than they do with the hydrogen. The electrons spend much more time with the oxygen than they do with the hydrogen. And this gives a polarity so that. Check this one side of the atom has a slight negative charge, and the other side of the atom has a positive charge. The atom is still negative. I mean, excuse me, it's still neutral. The atom is still neutral, but the electrons are not distributed evenly. This has huge implications, particularly for the properties of water. This has symmetry and the electrons are shared equally. Here we have unequal sharing of electrons from extreme to partial. These molecules remain neutral. Here we have sodium chlorine ions, but as a whole it's neutral. Okay. Is that clear? Questions. All right. Again basic chemistry. Water, as I just said, is is quite polar because these oxygens pull on the electrons. Much more strongly than the hydrogen. Hydrogen atom hydrogen nucleus can. And so it has this side is slightly positive. And this slide is side is slightly negative. The H2O molecule as a whole is neutral. But it has an unequal distribution of electrons. So this leads us to a third type of chemical bond, which is called a hydrogen bond because hydrogen is typically involved. I'll just touch upon it now and this will be expanded much more next class when we talk about the properties of water. Because one side of this atom has a slight positive charge and the other side has a slight negative charge, this is plus one. This is minus two. These two water molecules actually are attracted to each other. Not super duper strongly, but quite significantly. Like that. This is not just for water, by the way. There are hydrogen bonds that hold, um, DNA together. There are hydrogen bonds that are found inside proteins. I'll come back to those later on. But the classic example is how these water molecules are attracted to each other, pull on each other, and pull on other things that are charged. And because one hydrogen can pull on excuse me. One, one oxygen can pull on two hydrogens because one oxygen can pull on two hydrogens. You actually get these networks. This pulling on two. This is pulling one. This is pulling on one like this. And you get a network of water molecules attracted to each other and depending on the temperature. As things cool down, more of these bonds form as we give in some heat kinetic energy. Some of these bonds break. These are breaking and forming all the time. And the unique properties of water that allow for life on this planet. Are very, very much due to the fact that water makes hydrogen bonds. We'll expand upon this next class when I talk more about the properties of water.
